ANNOUNCING v1.6 of Tahoe-LAFS

The Tahoe-LAFS team is pleased to announce the immediate
availability of version 1.6 of Tahoe-LAFS, an extremely
reliable distributed key-value store and cloud filesystem.

Tahoe-LAFS is the first cloud storage system which offers
"provider-independent security" -- meaning that not even your
cloud service provider can read or alter your data without your
consent.  Here is the one-page explanation of its unique
security and fault-tolerance properties:

http://allmydata.org/source/tahoe/trunk/docs/about.html

Tahoe-LAFS v1.6.0 is the successor to v1.5.0, which was
released August 1, 2009. In this major new release, we've added
deep-immutable directories (cryptographically unalterable
permanent snapshots), greatly increased performance for some
common operations, and improved the help text, documentation,
command-line options, and web user interface. The FUSE plugin
has been fixed. We also fixed a few bugs. See the release notes
for details:

http://allmydata.org/source/tahoe/trunk/relnotes.txt

In addition to the core storage system itself, a crop of
related projects have sprung up to extend it and to integrate
it into operating systems and applications. These include
frontends for Windows, Macintosh, JavaScript, and iPhone, and
plugins for Hadoop, bzr, duplicity, TiddlyWiki, and more. See
the Related Projects page:

http://allmydata.org/trac/tahoe/wiki/RelatedProjects

We believe that erasure coding, strong encryption, Free/Open
Source Software and careful engineering make Tahoe-LAFS safer
than other storage technologies.
